# Contact

## Bugtracking system

<span class="summary">The bugtracking system is the central platform for
bugs and problems related to collectd.</span> If you have a problem
regarding <span class="collectd">collectd</span> or you have found a bug
in the daemon or one of its plugin, please tend to [bugtracking
system](https://github.com/collectd/collectd/issues). Be sure to check
your problem has already be reported before filing a new bug and provide
as much information as possible.

## Mailing list

<span class="summary">The mailing list is the central place for
announcements and development issues.</span> New versions of
<span class="collectd">collectd</span> are announced on the mailing list
and we're discussing development related topics here. It used to be
**the** place for bugs and problems, too, but this proved to be
impractical. You can still ask your questions there, but please make
sure to [faq.shtml"\>read the FAQs](%3C!--#echo%20var=) first. Please
don't be surprised if we ask you to open a bug in the bugtracking
system.

### Subscribe

You can subscribe to the mailinglist at [collectd's mailinglist
page](http://mailman.verplant.org/listinfo/collectd).

### Post

You can post to the list even if you're not subscribed. Your posting in
held for approval in this case though, to protect ourselves against
spam. The email-address is `<collectd@ahj4oeY8aiKeverplant.org>`.

### Archives

You can read archived message in the [mailinglist
archives](http://mailman.verplant.org/pipermail/collectd/). Please do
that before asking questions that may have been answered before.

## IRC

Some of us are hanging out in `#collectd` on
[freenode](http://freenode.net/). Feel free to join us there :)

## Google+

We have a [Google+](https://plus.google.com/) page,
[+collectd](https://plus.google.com/108065990339533055065). We'll be
using this as a development micro-blog and post about current
developments, requests for review, cool new uses and so on. The link
<http://collectd.org/+> will redirect you to there.

## Twitter

We have a [Twitter](http://twitter.com/collectd) account named
"@collectd" which we use for small project updates from time to time.
Please feel free to "follow" us.

## Security issues

To to report a *sensitive security issue*, reach out to
`<octo@collectd.org>`, GnuPG `0x0C705A15`.

## Imprint

This site is run by [Florian octo Forster](http://octo.it/),
\<`octo at collectd.org`\>.

### Postal address

Florian Forster  
Stralsunder Straße 46,  
90425 Nürnberg

### Disclaimer

The german legislator requires me to dissociate myself from external
links explicitly:

Hiermit distanziere ich mich ausdrücklich von allen Inhalten aller
extern gelinkten Seiten auf meinem Server und mache mir diese Inhalte
nicht zu eigen. Diese Erklärung gilt für alle auf meinem Server
angebrachten externen Links.
